Surveys find that roughly 80% of Gen Z
believe in astrology and many allow it
to influence major life decisions.
>> But what would be sad is if that number
got to 100%. Then the civilization just
goes back to the cave where everything
that happened in the natural world was
created by forces beyond our knowledge
and understanding. So if you want to
think you're not in control of your fate
because the sun, moon, and planets are.
It's a free country. But I'm creating
meaning in my life cuz I can control
that. But is there anything that the
universe does to influence us?
>> Yes.
>> Really?
>> Yeah. And I'll tell you how. You ready?
>> Neil deGrasse Tyson is one of the most
recognizable voices in modern science
>> who turns the mysteries of the universe
into simple truths
>> and simple truths into life lessons.
>> As a scientist, it's disturbing how
easily people divide each other based on
skin color, religion, what food you eat,
what language they speak, and then they
find some other philosophy that differs,
and then they go to war. But when I step
back with a cosmic perspective, you
realize how ridiculous it is.
>> Give me the cosmic perspective.
>> Well, there's nothing that we can put on
the table that can rival the
measurements of the universe. And we are
literally composed of stardust. So when
people think they're different, they
have DNA in common with all of the life
forms on Earth. Like you have 20%
identical genes to a banana.
>> Excuse me.
>> Okay, we all do, not just you. And
that's not there are molecules that went
in and out of your lungs that are in
China being breathed by people there.
And go further back. Jesus inhaled them.
So, how's that the oneness with others?
>> That can't be true.
>> And that's the next problem. People
value what they think is true more than
what is true. That's a recipe for the
unraveling of civilization as we know
it. But as a scientist, show me the
data.
>> And as someone that knows so much about
the universe and objective truth, I've
got a lot of questions. So, what do you
think is the probability of me getting
to another planet in my lifetime? And
then, could you make the case that the
universe is simulated by some sort of
advanced life form? And also, did humans
evolve at some point to believe? And you
think you would be happier if you
believed in God.
>> Oh, so you're going to spice us up a
bit. Okay. So,
>> I see messages all the time in the
comments section that some of you didn't
realize you didn't subscribe. So, if you
could do me a favor and double check if
you're a subscriber to this channel,
that would be tremendously appreciated.
It's the simple, it's the free thing
that anybody that watches the show
frequently can do to help us here to
keep everything going in this show in
the trajectory it's on. So, please do
double check if you've subscribed and uh
thank you so much because in a strange
way you are you're part of our history
and you're on this journey with us and I
appreciate you for that. So, yeah, thank
you.
[Music]
>> I've been watching a lot of videos of
yours I think because I've reached the
stage in my life where I've become
really existentially curious. I think we
all do at some point and especially the
more you've lived the more it all sort
of you ask what does it all mean? How
does it all come together?
>> What will it mean in to me in 5 years 10
years?
>> Uh I don't know if you're old enough to
think about your mortality.
Uh but that's a thing when you have
fewer years left than the years you've
lived and and you can I think the way
they say it is there's you can have a
good expectation to live as long as your
parents did. I lost both of them in the
last 5 years. So so that's my horizon.
And the fact that we die
has a capacity to bring focus into the
remaining time you're alive.
Cuz think about it. If knowing you're
going to die
brings focus and purpose
and resolve
and action,
then if you lived forever, what's your
hurry? For me, knowing I'm going to die
gives meaning
to my remaining life. Whereas, if I'm
never going to die, then mathematically
that would mean I'd lead a life of no
meaning at all because there's no way to
focus an infinity amount of time into
anything and have it be meaningful. So,
I'm taking mortality as a very serious
force operating on happiness,
productivity. Can you do something for
the world?
And on my tombstone,
what I want to say, what I want it to
say is a quote from Horus man. Be
ashamed to die until you have won some
victory for humanity. I want to have
made a difference in the world. I want
the world to have been better off
because I lived in it.
Is that too much to ask of any of us?
Really, we're all capable of good deeds.
So
if the world is better off, I'm I've
played my part as a citizen of planet
Earth.
>> And this all sort of dovetales into this
new book that you've written. Um it's I
call it a new book, but it's really a
revision of a very successful book that
uh I think the first copy was published
in 1998
called Just Visiting the Planet. Further
scientific adventures of Merlin from
Amnesia.
>> Amnissia. Yeah. When I think about these
bigger questions about the universe,
meaning purpose, death, why am I here,
religion, all these things, so often I
think about them through the context and
information that I find in your work
because when I think of like the world
being so big, as you talk about in this
book and so infinite and all these
stars, I feel meaningless in a nice way.
Sometimes I feel like the that I
that I worry about no longer matters.
But then when you talk about
>> you feel meaningless in a happy way.
>> Yeah. I feel like the things that cause
me uh suffering don't matter as much as
I thought they did. And then you talked
about shortening time by realizing that
you're going to live for 90 years or or
80 years creating great amounts of
meaning. And it feels somewhat like a I
don't know.
>> Yes. The universe is huge in size, in
age, in contents. There's nothing we can
put on the table that can rival
those measurements that we make of the
universe. However,
>> how big?
>> Well, there's the light from the most
distant galaxies has been traveling for
nearly 14 billion years. 10 billion
years more than Earth has even existed
if you want to get a sense of that. And
so but think about it a whole other way
that if you look at the ingredients of
life
not just human life but life on earth
and you can rank the elements what's the
number one element in life we could
mention the human body number one
element is hydrogen
that's contained in the H2O
of the water content of your body which
depending on how chubby you are can
anywhere from a half to 3/4 of your body
weight is water
and all right what's the next most
abundant element in your body it's
oxygen attached to the water okay H2O
and both the H and the O appear in many
many other molecules in our body in the
DNA and in your muscle tissue all of
this and in the blood okay what's third
carbon which you would have thought had
to be somewhere in the just because you
know we're carbon based life. Fourth is
nitrogen.
Okay. Fifth, I'll put them all together
and just say other. Okay. So that's the
sequence of elements. And now you say,
what are the sequence of elements in the
universe? The number one is hydrogen.
The number two is helium, but that's
chemically inert. You might remember
from high school chemistry. You can't do
anything with it anyway. Helium. Next in
the universe, oxygen. Next, carbon. Next
nitrogen. Next
other. Okay. So we are one for one
matched to the ingredients of the
universe. And one of the gifts of 20th
century astrophysics
is gifts to civilization is where those
ingredients came from.
We trace those ingredients, the hydrogen
to the big bang itself and all these
heavier elements to stars that
manufactured those elements in their
core and the crucible that is their
core. They lived out their lives. They
exploded, scattered that enrichment into
gas clouds so that the next generation
of stars would have planets and at least
one of them
have life as we know it, life on Earth.
So that
we you you can think of us not just
figuratively
but literally composed of stardust.
And so so that it's not that we are
alive in the universe. Yes, that's true.
But the universe is alive within us. So
we're special because we're the same as
the universe. often when people think
they're special, I want to be different
from No, we're saying because we have
human DNA on an earth where we have DNA
in common with all other animals, all
other life forms on Earth. Do you
realize we we and mushrooms have more in
common with each other than either we or
mushrooms have with green plants? The
common ancestor between fungus and
animals split later in the tree of life.
Then its common ancestor split with
green plants.
>> You You have 20% identical genes to a
banana.
>> Excuse me.
>> We all do. Not just you. Not just you.
Okay.
>> You have it. So when you consider all of
this,
it's it's not just that we're alive in
the universe.
The universe is alive within us.
>> And that that discovery
>> borders on the spiritual.
>> Yeah.
>> And it's a scientific result. So when I
look up at night, I never feel small. I
feel large. I feel as large as the
universe itself because that's where we
came from. We're a participant in a
great unfolding story of cosmic
evolution.
>> The minute you said that, I thought of
all these Eastern traditions and
religions that say we are one. And from
a scientific perspective,
as you say, we very much are one.
>> Yeah. It's what's interesting is one of
my deep concerns about the world is many
philosophies or religions that say we
are one. They find some other philosophy
that differs and then they go to war.
>> Yeah.
>> I don't mean to laugh at that, but it's
we're not good at feeling oneness with
everyone. It's easy to feel oneness with
our tribe. Our tribe could be skin
color, religion, who you sleep with, who
you don't sleep with, what food you eat,
what rituals you perform. And so those
people choose sides based on so many
factors that
I I it's actually to me just as a
scientist it's disturbing how easily and
quickly we will divide each other
without and make that the reason for how
you interact rather than see what we
have in common and make that the reason
for why we would come together. This has
been really front of mind for me for the
last 24 hours. There's been a lot of
things that have happened in the news
that have thrown the conversation around
division to the very front of my mind
and that you know in the UK we've got
all these people that are marching next
week I believe um through London because
of you know various political things and
I was saying to my friends last night I
said I think actually that the root
cause isn't this or that it's the
division itself and it's
>> yeah you can overanalyze I mean if you
look deeper than whatever people are
saying is the reason they are marching
or arguing If you just, you know, part
the curtains and unpack it all, at the
bottom of that is
there's a tribe here and a tribe here
and they think this way and they think
that way and never the twain meet unless
we rethink how we interact with one
another. It's it's I mean, think about
it, you know, with the race
the race friction that existed around
the world, but especially in in colonial
Europe and the slave trade and all of
this and and okay, that's not good. It's
bad. Uh, and all right, but then you
look at World War I and World War II,
that's white people fighting white
people,
>> slaughtering them in great numbers. So,
you can divide by skin color, but
apparently people find plenty of reasons
to divide and conquer, to divide and
kill, to divide and oppress. and and
skin color is one in a long list of all
the reasons people have given to the
religious wars to worshiping the
different god or worshiping the god
differently. These are human beings. And
you know, I wrote a whole book, one of I
think one of those books in your stash
there, that one. Yeah. Cosmic
perspectives on civilization. The one in
your left hand there, that one is is
what conflict in the world looks like
when you are scientifically literate and
you have a dose of cosmic perspective on
top of it.
>> Give me the cosmic perspective, please.
It's
you're fighting over that line in the
sand. When I'm out here at the moon
looking at Earth, this fragile
ecosystem, do you realize Earth's
atmosphere is to Earth what the skin of
an apple is to an apple in terms of
thickness. So, I see people trashing the
planet, fighting one another. again just
based on who's on what side of the line
in the sand or who they worship or who
they don't worship or what their skin
color is or where they were born, what
language they speak, what accent they
have. And I step back and from orbit
it's
ocean, land, clouds.
From the moon, there's Earth suspended
there in space.
I almost don't want to zoom in on it
because people value what they think is
true
more than what
is true. There are objective truths out
there, but it's almost as though people
fight and argue more vehematly the less
evidence there is to support what it is
they think is true.
There's an old saying, if an argument
lasts more than five minutes, then both
sides are wrong.
>> This it's true probably 80 90% of the
time, but it's something definitely
something to think about.
>> How have your spiritual and religious
beliefs evolved throughout the course of
your career based on all that you've
come to know about the objective nature
of the universe? Has there been an
evolution?
>> It depends on what you mean by
evolution. I was raised Catholic.
>> Yeah. But we were raised basically in a
secular household even though we would
go to church every weekend. What I mean
by that is we come home at no time do
either of my parents say, "Don't do
that. Jesus is watching. You keep that
up, you'll go to hell. Do this cuz it'll
please God."
Never was there such a conversation as
that in the household. So the household
was driven by
objective truths or or life experience
as would be brought from elders to the
next generation. Something that was more
common in that generation than in the
current generation because now elders
don't know anything about anything. You
know your kid comes up to you and say
mommy daddy I want to be a a YouTube
influencer. And you're saying what? Go
back to school. No. And then they become
a YouTube influencer and they out earn
you. So this the the the divide is
greater than ever before between one
generation and the next for sure. But by
the time I turned eight, I found the
religious teachings less and less
convincing. And so by the time I I was
nine when I discovered the universe or
really the universe discovered me, a
first visit to my local planetarium. So
yeah, I I wouldn't call it an evolution,
but I will say this. You didn't ask
this, but it relates.
Before I was more recognized, you know,
you'd be on an airplane. What do you do?
What do you do? Okay. They find out I do
astrophysics. Then out come the
questions. Okay. Oh, tell me about black
holes, relativity, the big bang. Uh,
aliens. Okay. And would always land on
God. And I used to give pretty straight
unforgiving answers to that question, to
that inquiry. But then I thought that's
not fair. There are people whose lives
pivot around their religious beliefs and
their spirituality.
And just cuz I've been discounting it
since I was eight. I shouldn't use that
as a force against them. I should at
least
understand where they're coming from. So
I systematically
acquired religious books
of all kinds. So I have the Torah. I
have multiple copies of the Quran,
Joseph Smith's account that led to the
Mormons. I have uh multiple
uh bits of literature from Jehovah's
Witnesses because they'll come to your
door and they want to hand you. So I
acquired all these books and I mostly
read them. I've skimmed all of them and
read some of them with a little more
intensity than others. All right.
On doing so, that enabled me, empowered
me to have more meaningful conversations
with people who were religious,
much more meaningful and more informed.
That's the key. I don't want to speak
about a religion unless I know as much
as I can about it. As an academic, that
should be what would be true of any
subject. You're an academic. You care
what's true, not what you think is true,
what is true or what people think.
>> All right? And there's no doubt that
religion has been one of the greatest
forces operating on civilization ever
since civilization.
When you look at as a source of people's
behavior, what they eat, like I said,
who they sleep with, where they sleep,
where they worship, who they worship,
all around the world, from animistic
native peoples where there's a spirit
energy imbued in the in the mountain, in
the brook, in the wind to
uh the monotheistic religions to the
polytheistic religions.
We don't call them that to put distance
between us. But the Greek gods were it
was their religion. We call it
mythology.
It was their religion. The Greek gods,
the Roman gods. So I'm I'm
conversational in all of this. So that
when someone says, "How do I feel? What
do I think?" I can do that without just
being obnoxious.
And so and and it's a have a meaningful
conversation.
>> I haven't done that.
>> You haven't?
>> No, I haven't. I haven't. But it's such
a good idea to do that, especially as
someone in my position that does a lot
of talking with people and asking
questions. But my the first thing that
sprung to mind was there was actually
two questions that sprung to mind. The
first was
how did that change you reading all
those books outside of you being able to
relate um with those well being able to
talk to them in a different way? And the
second question cuz I've watched Cosmos.
I've watched it several times. It's my
one of my me and my partner's favorite
things to watch is you you going from
the very beginnings of time through the
universe into where we are.
>> You gotta love that calendar too.
>> That's my favorite thing and I try and
persuade everybody to watch that. My
question was about because I watched
that and I watched um how the universe
has evolved over time or at least our
understanding of it and and how it came
to be is did humans
evolve at some point to believe? Are we
meant to believe? Well, so the best way
to ask that is let's go back to the
earliest humans we have fossil records
of and we can go back to Neanderthal.
For example, Neanderthal is is a branch
of homminids that went extinct.
Basically, there's some crossbreeding
and there's Neanderthal DNA in many
humans today, but as a as a branch of of
the homminids, they they went extinct.
So the Neanderthal then there's
Cromagnon uh we are you know Homo
sapiens
coming after Cromagnon and so when you
look at burial grounds
the Neanderthal bury their dead with
things with parts of their life of the
person who died. Now, why would you do
that unless you had some belief
that there was something more to come
for that person?
I mean that probably the people who took
it to the limit were the Egyptians. All
right. For the Egyptian royalty. I mean,
they bury you with all kinds of stuff.
Yeah.
>> And in fact, in Greece, I I read this,
it's not that I researched it, and I'm
not a scholar in this, but that when
they buried you, they put a coin in your
mouth or in your hand somewhere on your
body so that when you got into Hades,
you can tip the ferryboat driver to
cross the river sticks to get into
Hades. You might even say that's the
beginning of what it was to be human
when people started thinking that way
about dying.
>> I mean, you might even re invert the
question and say it's not when did we
start. It's we existed
in all the ways we know oursel know what
ourselves to be when that ritual came
upon
our ancestors
>> and the survival benefit in believing. I
I don't know
>> really.
>> Yeah. I I don't know. We We're pretty
sure there's a survival benefit of group
think
and
religion is group think. If there ever
was. It was we will all believe this
>> in this way and we will behave in that
way on those occasions and you will not
deviate from it. Yes.
>> And part of that package of beliefs
includes statements about the afterlife
and how you should behave in this life.
Otherwise, you don't go to heaven. You
go to hell. I don't think Judaism has a
hell, but you you're not as rewarded as
you'd otherwise be. Now that forms a a
corpus of beliefs that can be highly
binding of a peoples
and especially if some other peoples
come up and they do other things and you
don't understand it, you don't know what
it is and they're they're a threat and
so you keep them out. You you do
whatever you can to preserve your
traditions relative to theirs.
Ultimately the worst that in its worst
manifestation is all out war. we just
kill people who don't believe the way
you do. So, so maybe
religion is kind of what defined humans
in the fossil record. I mean, like I
said, that's an interesting inversion of
that question. Not when did humans begin
being religious?
>> You define
who we are as humans as when religion
showed up in the in the burial grounds
of
of cavemen. you just talked about as
being bound there by certain shared
beliefs and ideas. And I think in
>> I think I I think ritual is one of the
strongest binding forces of society that
we have.
>> And I I think that people are maybe
unbinding. You can if you look at the
narrative in society, it's about be your
own boss, stand on your own two feet.
More people are lonely, living alone, um
having less kids, are working freelance
and remotely. So it feels like in a
weird way we're becoming more
independent and there's a somewhat of a
cost to that and actually my friends
that are struggling the most in their
lives are those that have the least
dependence
on a village. So I always wonder if
people we need to ladder up to the
universe i.e. me, my family, maybe my
village, maybe my country, the planet,
the universe
in God
>> the metaverse.
>> Yeah. And like God
>> the multiverse. Yeah. So let me just
react to that.
>> There have been studies about the
psychological effects of this kind of
life. Basically the the social media too
early in one's life
>> uh force that operates. But I
so I don't know. I don't want to be the
person who says in my day we did it
right and you you youngans don't know
what you're doing and you're all going
to I mean I've seen the films of people
of officials smashing pinball machines
with sledgehammers saying it will be the
death of the next generation because
it's they're not studying. They're
they're it's gambling. They I've seen
you've seen see people burning rock and
roll records
>> you know. We've seen We've seen this and
I I'm I don't want to be that guy. I'd
rather be the person that says
they're going to create a whole other
reality
that was not my reality growing up. And
I don't know that I can or should value
judge that.
>> When they come up in the ranks, they'll
be mature adults. They'll figure out
what the rhythms are of that world. And
I will say, however, that if you go far
enough back, no one ever traveled
anywhere, you you you'd spend your whole
life not going more than 30 miles from
your hometown. Two, a couple hundred
years back. So now people do actually
communicate with countless thousands of
people around the world. So that's it's
different. I'm again, I'm not value
judging it, but it's different. And
you're exposed to different ideas. think
maybe it tribalizes you more or maybe it
softens you. It has the power to do
both.
What concerns me is because when I post
to social media, I've learned the art of
not expressing an opinion because I
don't care what your opinion is. I don't
care that you have my opinion. What I
care about as an educator and as
especially as a scientist is that your
opinion is based on objective reality,
objective truths. If you have an opinion
where the foundation of it is what do
you what what then you're just floating.
There's no and then if you rise to power
of laws and legislation and then you
shape a society based on what you think
is true or want to be true rather than
what is objectively true. That's a
recipe for the unraveling of
civilization as we know it. So this
loneliness bit I I don't know how to
comment on that. I I don't have the
expertise, but I do know that I don't
want to be the person on the rocking
chair. Get off my lawn. You
>> and I I I guess I I've been trying to
figure out if we if I need to make try
and make sure my life ladders upwards.
>> Oh. Oh, let me get back to that. So it
may be that the most important role of
church
wasn't to give a specific recipe for how
you pray or again who you pray to or
when you pray. Maybe that's maybe that
wasn't its greatest value. Maybe its
greatest value was the community that it
created.
>> Mhm.
>> Everyone comes together and they're all
in one room
>> at the same time. That's not happening
today. Like you said, there's a people
are less religious today than ever
before. Uh there many people who were
once religious would today statistically
would today say they're spiritual, which
means they're separated from the rules
and regulations that that typically
um dictate how you behave within a
religion. But the fact is you're talking
about going upwards. So you have your
your city, your community, your
neighbors and your church, your
synagogue, your mosque, your your your
temple, whatever is the the the place
where you gather with some frequency. Uh
that
surely has value
because we need each other.
I'm jealous when I, you know, you drive
down the country road and there's a deer
just walking around and I'm thinking,
you know, society collapsed. That deer
is just fine. The deer was born in the
woods, is finding food, is grown up,
whereas I need other people to survive
in this world. I don't know how to hunt.
I don't know how to skin game. I don't
know. You know, I'd like knowing that
there's a quart of milk waiting for me
on the grocery store and and you know,
ready to eat cereals. That's
we have an interdependence as never
before.
>> And how do we maintain that without
scattering to the winds?
>> You said you lost both your parents in
the last 5 years.
>> Yeah.
as someone that knows so much about the
universe and objective truth and
reality, how do you how do you contend
with grief in that scenario, but also
how does that does that change you in
any way?
>> It did a little bit. Not as much as I
thought it might have. Uh my father was
89 when he died. That was 5 years ago.
My mother was 2 days shy of her 95th
birthday. So that's what So I'm putting
myself like right between them in my
life expectancy. I think I'll get to 92.
It's it's the average of those two, you
know. So
when you die at that age,
it's sad, but it's not tragic.
>> So I that's an important distinction for
me. A tragic life is a life that could
have been lived, but through act of war
or negligence or or negligence of the
person or of others, the life is cut
short.
Then that's
tragic.
It's a life not fully lived, but if you
lived a full life,
they were married 50 something years.
Uh
it's sad, but it's not tragic. In fact,
it's not even sad. It's something to
celebrate.
And so I miss them.
I miss them more than I thought I would
because they carried quite a bit of
wisdom with them. My father was active
in the civil rights movement. My mother
uh was a gerontologist. So they both
cared very deeply about the plight of
others and I'm their son, the
astrophysicist, but so I go off with my
head in the sky. But I was anchored into
the human condition and anchored to
think about it, to care about it. And
when I encounter
things in modern life
is I wonder what my mother would say
about that. I wonder what insights my
father and they're not there. I don't
have them for that. So the way it's
changed me is it has put a greater
expectation
of me on myself
to make sure I have wisdom that I can
share with my kids my two kids. the kind
of wisdom that I gleaned from my
parents.
So that again this is not wisdom of what
car to buy or what job to have because
they have other values they have other
expectations of society but in terms of
humanto human interaction in terms of
love terms of challenges in life and
overcoming them. Some of those are
timeless. Some of those are, you know,
how to how to navigate difficult people,
how to appreciate nature so you don't
take it for granted.
Uh, one of the things I liked about
Joyce Kilmer's poem
on a tree,
uh, is about a tree. And we've all seen
trees.
So, why does this matter? Because it
takes an artist,
a poet, a writer, a sculptor, a painter.
For me, the artist job
is to encourage us, stimulate us
to pay attention to things we might
otherwise take for granted.
Because so much of life
is what you might just walk by and not
even give it any thought.
And so I don't walk by trees without
thinking something about that poem.
>> What is the poem?
>> I think that I shall never see a poem
lovely as a tree. A tree whose hungry
mouth is pressed against the earth's
sweet flowering breast. A tree that
looks at God all day and lifts her leafy
arms to pray. A tree that may in summer
wear a nest of robins in her hair. Upon
whose bosom snow has lain, who
ultimately lives with rain? Poems are
made by fools like me.
But only God can make a tree.
But only God can make a tree. I spend so
long these days thinking and talking to
people about what all of this means and
uh I've got more and more I saw you
talking about the simulation theory once
or twice
>> and I I started to fall into that that
hole of thinking.
>> Oh yes it's No, you got to you know
>> step outside every now and then and you
know smell the roses.
>> But you said you wouldn't be surprised
if people found out the universe is
simulated by some sort of advanced life
form.
>> Yeah. Given what we can now compute,
throw in quantum computing on top of
that,
we we don't have this power yet. But to
make a world in our computer where the
characters that in that world believe
they have free will
and then they conduct themselves and
then they invent computers and then they
make a world inside of their computer
and where their characters think they
have free will and then they so then
it's this simulated universes all the
way down and
close your eyes and throw a dart. Which
of these are you going to get the first
universe that invented the simulated
universe or the zillion ones that
followed? The dart's likely to hit one
of the others. But my my escape hatch
from that is
since we do not yet know or have the
power to make a perfectly simulated
world, it means we are either the first
universe that's real that hasn't created
one yet or we're the last universe
that hasn't evolved yet to have created
one of its own cuz all the middles have
the power to create one. So that takes
it, you know, a zillion to one against
us to maybe 50/50.
>> Oh, interesting. Never heard that
before.
>> So I'm a little I'm a little more
comfortable that way.
>> Comfortable?
>> Yeah, I sleep a little better at night.
>> But I guess it wouldn't matter anyway if
we
>> It actually it wouldn't matter if we're
completely simulated. What do you care?
You're living your life. You I know we
don't want to believe that there are
puppet strings on us.
Um, part of me thinks that though,
you know, just when Earth is kind of
everything on Earth is kind of stable.
Oh, CO shows up. Oh, so this this is the
programmer saying, you know, the earth
is too boring now. We got to spice it up
a bit. They throw in a pandemic. Okay. A
once in a century pandemic. Now, now
we're entertaining for them. What do we
do? Who gets vaccinated? Who doesn't?
Who's going to fight? Who dies? Who
lives? Okay. So then we kind of get
through that. We get the vaccine.
Okay. Just calming down off of that and
they said, "Oh, let's make a billionaire
real estate developer from New York City
the most powerful person in the world.
Let's stir the pot again." And so now
there's a whole other set of stir pot
stirring that's going on. So that's kind
of consistent with
a snot-nosed alien
kid in their parents' basement
programming our existence.
That's what I would do. I would throw in
interest. There's a game Sim Sim City.
>> Yeah,
>> I played that. That's how old I am. Sim
City. So you were mayor of this city and
people can vote you out of office. Uh,
so you have to do things that make them
happy and there's an opinion poll that's
there. And if you spend too much money
here, you're not spending money on the
schools. That's bad. But then there's
crime goes up and you're realizing, oh
my gosh, in even this simple simulation,
so many interdependent
phenomenon are taking place. Then
then you things that happen then
Godzilla steps through and plows through
the city. Okay. Now, Godzilla is not
real, but it kind of is because that
would be a disaster. That is it a flood?
Is it fires? It's it's a thing that
nobody saw coming. Okay, we are
recording this interview on September
11th. I live four blocks from ground
zero. That's Godzilla walking through
the city. How do you respond to that?
What's You know, you didn't know that
was going to happen the day before. So
realizing that in this game it's only
interesting to play when disastrous
things happen, not too many in a row
because you have to be able to recover.
So when I look at our world, I'm
thinking the best argument I have for
being in a simulation is how often some
big disaster takes place. When it was
the first world war and then after that
the peace, oh pandemic. Okay, the the
1918 flu pandemic. Hey, now we get out
of that. Oh, no. Second World War. Okay,
we get out of that. The Cold War,
nuclear holocaust. Okay, so that's my
that's me looking over the shoulder of
the programmer.
>> Oh god. I think I prefer the world where
I feel like I have free will and there's
not.
>> Does it make a difference if you believe
you have free will even if you don't?
No, because I'll never know.
>> And you know the fun the fun answer to
that uh ask me say uh do you have free
will? Ask me that.
>> Do you have do do we have free will? Do
you have free will?
>> What choice do I have?
>> No. If you don't have free will, then
you don't even have an option to say you
don't. So I So you just live life. Just
live your life so that the world is
better off for you having lived in it.
>> And what does that mean for you? Like
>> it means people are better off. The the
institutions are better off. People are
happier,
healthier,
wealthier,
safer,
better fed.
That rationality matters in politics, in
law makingaking.
And that helps to will help to ensure
stability of anything you build going
forward. But yeah, that's all. I mean,
it's not it's not complicated. And you
were talking about meaning before. I
stopped looking for meaning decades ago
because I realize
I we any of us has the power to make
meaning in life. If you're going to look
for meaning, are you looking under a
rock, behind a tree? What? It's as
though meaning is sitting there waiting
for you to find it. Oh, I found meaning.
There it is. Now my life is complete.
That feels so
so powerless
on your own destiny.
Whereas
I I make meaning I want to learn
something today that I didn't know
yesterday. I want to lessen the
suffering of someone today
compared with however that person was
living yesterday. I want to
I want to use what I learn
to well up within me and manifest as
wisdom
because information is not really useful
until it becomes knowledge. And then
knowledge is good. You can show off if
you have a lot of knowledge. That's what
these game shows do. But in the end,
the best use of knowledge is when it
becomes wisdom.
And wisdom,
people say, "I don't like getting older.
I want to be young again. I don't want
to be young again." When I was 30, I was
an idiot. Even when I was 30, I thought
I was brilliant. Right? So,
don't get older unless you have wisdom
to show for it.
It's when you don't have something to
show for your age, you want to be
younger.
You're just getting old with nothing to
show for it. But I continue to learn
things every day, passively and
actively. Passively is you just notice,
you know, open your eyes sometimes and
see what's happening, where things are
headed, what they're doing. You learn.
Not all things you learn are good. And
if they're bad or need adjustment or
need help,
do something about it if you can. So
that's how I derive meaning. Hence my
tombstone. Be ashamed to die unless
you've scored some victory for humanity.
There's the meaning for you.
>> There's a whole class of billionaires
that are trying to live forever now. And
I think we are on the verge of being
able to extend life potentially
indefinitely.
>> Yeah. We're looking for the date. It's
called escape velocity. You know about
that phrase? It exists in astrophysics
of course but the escape velocity for
earth for example is seven miles per
second. So escape velocity in
astrophysics is the speed that you
launch something so that it never comes
back no matter how hard the gravity
tries. Okay. So every object has an
escape velocity. The scape philosophy in
aging is
the idea is there is a generation yet to
be born but in the very near future
who
will not not only live longer than the
previous generation.
So so here here's a a cleaner way to say
this.
Every year
you can expect to live one month longer
>> because knowledge about human physiology
has gotten better.
>> Okay.
>> Okay. Just think about it that way.
>> Yeah.
>> And so we know what to eat, what not to
eat, how to exercise, how to not over
exercise, how to how to maintain your
health, well, your health and
physiology. All right. There will come a
day where
every year that you're alive, medicine
has figured out a way for you to live an
extra year.
That's the escape velocity.
So every year you live another year and
after that it could be every year you
live two years. So that's the escape
velocity.
So it's not just everybody lives forever
today. it sort of works its way into the
population and yeah I don't I don't want
to live forever.
I don't
take me off this earth
provided I mean I want I still have more
to give more books to write that in my
judgment would make the world better
than it currently is.
So, I don't want to die before I get as
much of that done as I can.
>> But are you scared of death?
>> No. Although that's easy to say cuz I'm
not at death's door.
>> And I had someone
rationalize with me, which is they made
a potent argument. It's I can say now
with another 20 years life expectancy,
15 20 years that I don't fear death. But
if I'm on my deathbed and someone says,
"If I can wave my hand and you could
live another year, would you?" The
answer is probably going to be yes and
at the end of that year if they So
I I don't know if my sentiments about
life and death will change
on my deathbed.
I know my mother there's a point where
she couldn't swallow and she didn't want
a feed tube and she said my time has
come
put me in in paliotative care and then
hospice and she was dead 10 days later.
So she was was in charge of her. They
could have fed her with a tube and she
would have been completely healthy for
another, you know, 5 years perhaps, but
nope. She raised two kids, three kids,
you know, 50-year marriage, happy life,
stable life,
and
yeah, I'm good with that. So the
billionaires, you know, that that's ego
for sure. If you live forever, there are
other people
who you're taking resources from who
would come behind you. That's one. But
two,
uh are you still contributing to the
world? Should you give another person a
chance who's in school now who might be
the next genius that'll figure out the
energy problem, the poverty problem, the
the pollution problem, the the Are you
figuring that out? No. You're in the
last You're You're 90 years old and
you're just living on your yacht.
So there's the pro there's the problem
that the last years of your life
are not the most creative, the most
ambitious, the most irreverent. It's a
reverence that where new ideas come. You
know, you've perhaps seen episodes of
Shark Shark Tank. You know, half or more
of those people are 30 and under. They
got ideas, fresh ideas. Everyone else is
entrenched. So if people start living
forever,
they're living forever in the part of
their life that is least useful to the
progress in advance of culture and
civilization. And so all of civilization
will stagnate.
>> Do do you think um in your lifetime you
said you've got a 20-year life
expectancy?
>> Well, 15 to 20.
>> 15 to 20 year life expectancy
>> based on my age now and the age my
parents died. Yeah,
>> but I mean you've done a lot of
neurological work and laid down a lot of
good foundations with all these books
you've written. So maybe it'll be the
upper end of that.
>> It's food for AI.
>> Food for chat GPT.
>> True.
>> What do you make of AI? What's your What
do you think?
>> I love it.
>> Yeah,
>> I love it. But I I'm
>> It's It's by the way, it's been here for
a while. It really spooked people when
it started writing your term paper and
composing your your painting and your
set design. All right, that the whole
other category of people got spooked by
that. Meanwhile, AI has been harnessed
and being fully used in my field and in
most of the physical sciences. Uh, it's
doing work. If you can do the work and
and I can go to the Bahamas, let it do
the work. We have telescopes coming
online that could not exist without the
intervention of AI to access the data,
reduce the data, analyze the data, make
a decision about whether it should go
back to the thing that had just observed
because that was weird compared the last
compared to the last time it was
observed. This is the Ver Rubin
telescope that I'm literally describing
now. And so we're we're we're living
with it. What it means is it ups it'll
have to up the game of people who say
they are creative. And what I mean by
that is I can say chat GPT take this
picture of us and say Chappie GPT
paint this scene in the style of Van Go.
It'll come back. The colors will be just
right. It'll have the swirly lines.
It'll be perfect. If Van Go were
standing, that's what Van Go would have
painted. If I say, "Chad GPT, paint us
in the style of no artist who has ever
lived."
I don't know what it's going to give us,
but it'll probably suck. Okay. And so
true creativity
is not aping what has happened before
and making adjustments. True creativity,
yes, you always build on others. I'm not
in denial of that. But true creativity
takes leaps
that most people don't even know can be
taken. Mhm.
>> And so the artist So that gap I think is
what what AI in the arts world is going
to force creative people to reach for.
Otherwise, you're replaced by
you're replaced by a a simple request in
the in the input line of of a large
language model or or of an art. I was
just wondering then if I watch Cosmos in
30 40 years time let's say 100 years
time I was wondering if this is the
moment where humans and computers in the
story of humanity become one and
intertwine if you think about things
like Neuralink which Elon's working on
to make when he first made that company
all of the narrative that he put out
there was about us being able to
interface with AI so we'd need like a
brain chip computer interface more
recently it's been about people that are
parapolgic and disabled and helping
blind people see but I think that's a
socially acceptable way to advance the
technology.
>> But in his early work, he said
>> super intelligence is going to arrive
and we're going to need a way to
basically keep up where we have better
sort of latency with um with the
technology. And I'm wondering if that's
like what we're seeing now.
>> Yeah. Super intelligence,
you know, if that happens,
then it becomes our overlord and we
become its pet.
>> Okay.
Now, that sounds pretty scary, but don't
we treat our pets better than we treat
other humans in the world? Think about
it. The pet is kept warm and fed and
happy and and would you do that for a
homeless person in the street? A person
of your own species? Probably not. So,
if we're the pet for the super
intelligence,
>> what about the chicken?
>> How bad could it be? We used to have
chickens when we were younger and I
watched my Nigerian mother chase that
chicken around the garden, grab it, pull
its head off, and cook it.
>> Wow. Okay. Yeah. Oh. Oh, you worried
that it's going to do that for us, so
we're going to run around.
>> Not all my pets made it
>> and snap. Not all the pets survive. Uh,
yeah. Depends on whether it needs us to
be alive or dead. We have to be relevant
to it in some way. Maybe we'll be
courtesters. We have to be
entertainment. Until then,
I I don't know that this is some special
moment. Uh I do a lot of reading of
history and throughout history.
Most occasions, especially in the era of
the industrial revolution, people think
they're living in a special moment.
>> And so I'm not going to be that guy who
says today is special because everyone
has thought they were in a special
moment.
>> And what do you think is the probability
of me getting to another planet in my
lifetime?
>> Zero.
>> Zero. Really?
>> Yeah.
You want to know why?
>> Yes, please.
>> Yeah, it's just zero.
>> I thought SpaceX going to go to Mars.
>> I have an unorthodox view on this. So,
you don't have to you don't have to
believe me,
you know. But
my read of history tells me that we only
do big expensive things if there's a
geopolitical reason for it. either an
economic
reason or a defense reason.
Uh not just cuz it's the next thing to
do.
And when we went to the moon, realize in
1961,
May 25th, President Kennedy, just 6
weeks after Yuri Gagarin flew around the
Earth in orbit, and we didn't have a a
ship that wouldn't blow up on the launch
pad that could carry humans yet.
He calls a joint session of Congress
and says, "If the events of recent weeks
couldn't even utter the man's name, the
events of recent weeks, and I
paraphrase, are any indication of the
impact of this adventure on the minds of
men everywhere, then we need to show the
world the path of freedom over the path
of tyranny."
It's a battlecry against communism, the
godless Russians,
everyone in the whole Soviet Union. We
were losing a technological race.
And that was the battlecry that prompted
Congress to write the check. Oh, later
on he says, "Oh, it'll be put a man on
the moon and before return him to safely
Earth and oh, that's so be let's hold
hand. That's so beautiful."
No one ever spent scads of money just
because it was a cool thing to do. That
has never happened ever. So,
we go to the moon.
People forgetting why we went to the
moon.
Say while we're on the moon, at this
rate, we'll be on Mars by 1985.
That'll be the next ambitious goal we'll
take on.
No,
because we didn't just go to the moon
because that was the next thing to do.
We went to the moon to beat the
Russians. And when we got to the moon
and we looked over our shoulder and the
Russians weren't there, we canled the
Apollo program.
197 We haven't been back to the moon in
53 years.
We canled it. Apollo 18 was ready to
fly. It's now in captivity in
Huntsville, Alabama in a museum on its
side. It's fascinating to walk the full
length of it. All rocket flight ready
parts. It never flew. We ended at Apollo
17.
No, we didn't go to Mars because we
didn't have geopolitical reasons to do
so. Neither economic nor for defense
reasons. Historically, people explored,
did expensive things for the glory of
God and royalty,
very expensive. The pyramids, the honor
of royalty. Okay. the church building,
cathedral building, all of these
activities. We're in the glory of power,
deity, and royalty. There's none of that
happens today. We're past that. The
power of kings and gods, that doesn't
happen. Nobody dislodges major
resources, capital resources of a nation
in the interest of a god or a king
anymore. Okay? It's secular. And secular
means it's money or it's war because you
feel threatened. Okay. So, you know,
we're going back to the moon now.
>> Yeah.
>> Project Artemis.
>> Did you ever think to stop and ask why?
Why didn't we stay on the moon in 1972?
Why don't we go back in 1980 or 1990,
2000, 2010? Oh, all of a sudden, let's
go back to the moon. Wouldn't that be
cool? Do you know when Artemis began in
the late teens?
Right about when China says, "We're
going to put Tykenauts on the moon."
>> Tyos.
>> No. Yeah. Chinese astronaut. Tyonaut.
>> All right. That's when we say, "Let's go
back to the moon." What a good idea.
Let's do that.
Really? Cuz we because it's just a good
idea. because we're a little bit spooked
by a friendly foe across the around the
world
might get the glory of that exercise.
And once again, it's a godless
country. Okay,
communism is godless by design, by
construct. So, here we are going back to
the moon. All right.
What motivation do we have to go to
Mars? Are there oil wells there? Is
there, you know, diamond mines?
We're not going to Mars. We're just not.
Unless
China says they want to put military
bases on Mars.
We're going to be in Mars in 10 months.
One month to design, build, and fund the
thing, and nine months to get to Mars. A
geopolitical force operating. Oh, by the
way, NASA doesn't have a rocket that'll
get us to Mars. They think they do, but
they don't really have one yet. Time to
do that. And say, "Well, does anybody
have a rocket?" Elon says, "I have a
rocket." So, if Elon rocket goes to
Mars, it's not cuz he sends it there.
It's cuz taxpayers sent it there.
By the way, he could go there on a
vanity project, but there's no business
case.
He He could fly to Mars, team up with
Jeff Bezos, they can send people to
Mars.
It's not a business case. And if you are
an investor in his company, you would
not agree to do that. You wouldn't. But
he doesn't need investors because he's
very wealthy. He could do it on his own.
Are you going to Mars as a tourist? Is
that Is that a business case? It'll It's
a trillion dollars to get to Mars.
First, second will be a little less.
I don't see that happening.
>> A trillion dollars
>> about that. Yeah.
If Earth were a school room globe,
with your fist, show me where you think
the moon is. This is Earth.
Take your fist and put it at the
distance the moon is. Your fist is about
the right size compared. Okay. Put
>> I mean,
>> right there.
>> Yeah.
>> Okay. Not too bad. It's 30t away. It's
in the next room.
>> Okay.
>> Okay. 30t away. Okay.
>> That's the moon.
>> Let's keep going.
How far away from Earth did the Bezos
Branson
uh rockets go?
>> Oh, not far.
>> The thickness of two dimes
above the surface of the Earth.
How far away is Mars? It's a mile away
>> from here.
>> Yes. From this Earth. It's a mile away.
>> It's in the Central Park.
>> The moon 30t away. Mars a mile away.
Yeah. It's a trillion dollars to Mars.
Yes.
>> How long?
>> 9 months. if and you have to wait till
the planets are configured so that when
you travel you arrive where Mars will be
when you get there and that's a minimum
energy orbit. If you had filling
stations along the way you can just fill
up with fuel and get there as fast as
you want but minimum energy orbit takes
about 9 months and then to come back you
have to wait till it it's configured
again a few years later so round trip to
Mars is 3 to 5 years easily. though
there's not an economic case. I'm not
saying we don't know how to get to Mars.
We have a SUVsized rover there now. All
right, discovering potential life from a
billion years ago. It's not about we
don't know how to get to Mars. This is
not a technological statement I'm
making. I'm talking about a practical
statement.
So, no, my read of history tells me no.
I I thought you were going to also add
to that that even if Elon wanted to do
it as a vanity project because he makes
all this money and manages to use
Starink as a way to fund it, whatever,
that the problem is Elon's going to die.
He's going to die in the, you know, the
next couple of decades, which means the
vanity element that comes from his
childhood situation where he wanted to
get out there and explore the stars cuz
he read that book has got 30 years, 40,
50 years left on it.
>> Well, that would make him want to hurry,
wouldn't it?
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. And plus, he said, "I don't want
to die on Earth. I want to die on Mars."
>> Mhm.
>> I'm paraphrasing, but that's the idea.
So, that's a goal. Sure. But don't tell
me it's a it's it's a it's a business
case. I can see a tourist case going
into orbit and even possibly visiting
the moon. It's 3 days there, 3 days
back. That's a week's vacation that you
would take. And I would save up 5 years,
10 years of vacation money if that was
the amount that it would take to go to
the moon in for one week. That would be
a really fun bucket list item for me.
>> If you're starting a business, that
means you're one person doing the
workload of probably about 50 people.
When I first founded this podcast, I had
no idea that I was about to step into a
hundred different roles that I'd never
trained for. Things like researching and
production and scheduling and branding,
all of it all at once. And this
experience isn't unique to me, but for
millions of founders around the world,
the tool that changes all of that is our
sponsor, Shopify. Shopify now powers 10%
of all US e-commerce from names like Gym
Shark and Mattel to first-time founders
just getting started. It's like having
your very own design studio, content
creator, and marketing team in one with
hundreds of online store templates, AI
tools to create product pages, and easy
to launch email and social media
plugins. Behind the scenes, Shopify
manages your inventory, international
shipping, and even your returns. So, if
you're ready to sell, sign up for your
$1 a month trial at shopify.com/bartlet.
That's shopify.com/bartlet.
$1 a month. No way.
You know, you've written this, you've
revised this book.
>> Oh, yeah. Just visiting this planet.
Yeah. I wrote a a column, a question and
answer column for like 10 years, 15
years. where people just ask me
questions from the public and I had a
pen name called Merlin and Merlin was
friends with with Newton and Galileo and
Marie Cury and all these people. So if
you ask Merlin, "Dear Merlin, I don't
quite understand gravity." Merlin say,
"Oh, Merlin had a conversation with
Isaac Newton in his backyard." And
here's how he answers that.
>> I think in the book you talk about a
golf ball sized black hole would weigh
more than Earth and swallow it whole,
leaving behind something the size of a
lime.
>> Yeah. Slightly bigger. Right.
>> What is You've been asked this so many
times, but I still don't know the
answer. What is a black hole? And how do
we even know if they're real if no one's
ever been to one?
>> Well, you can know things without
visiting them. I mean, that's the
methods and tools and machines of
science are remarkable in their ability
to learn something without actually
having to see it with your eyes or hear
it with your ears or to touch it with
your fingers. We have
in fact science didn't take off until
these machines became a fundamental part
of how we investigated the world
replacing our five senses
>> because there's nothing more feeble in
this world than you thinking you
understand reality through your five
senses that that I don't want to call it
feeble I would call it errorprone
errorrone remember I told you about
escape velocity of earth
>> you remember what I the value I said it
7 miles
>> paying attention per minute per second.
>> Per second.
>> That's very fast. Seven miles per. So
the adage what goes up must come down.
>> Mhm.
>> That's not true. It's true for almost
anything you would experience. But you
can launch something at 7 miles per
second. It'll never ever come back.
That's the escape velocity for Earth.
Okay.
If Earth had more mass and the gravity
were stronger,
>> the escape velocity is higher.
That would make sense because there's
more gravity that you have to escape.
>> Let's keep up that exercise.
Cram in more and more mass. Just keep
doing that. Escape velocity keeps going
up. Eventually, the escape velocity hits
the speed of light.
At that point, light can't even escape.
Light is the fastest thing in the
universe. If light can't escape, if you
fall in, you don't escape either.
There's no better description of a hole
than that.
And worse yet, it's a hole in any
direction you approach it. Not just a
hole in the street or in the floor.
It's a three-dimensional hole.
And how do we know it's there? Because
it distorts the fabric of space and time
around it. We see galaxies behind
concentrations of matter black holes and
the shape of the galaxy is distorted
because Einstein tells us tells us that
gravity distorts the fabric of space and
time. So that's one way we discover
black holes. Another way is most stars
in the night sky are binary and multiple
star systems. Most of them
you can't see it because you just have
human vision. You whip out a telescope,
you see, oh my gosh, there are two
stars, not just one. If there's a pair
of stars and one of them becomes a black
hole and this one ages, it expands and
some of its material spills onto and
orbits around the event horizon of the
black hole. This swirling material,
>> gets hotter and hotter and hotter and it
radiates x-rays and ultraviolet.
We have x-ray and ultraviolet telescopes
that see every one of these in the night
sky. They're all black holes. And it's
created from an explosion.
>> Uh there's a a star that wants to
explode, but it has so much mass the
explosion doesn't overcome the gravity
and the star collapses down on itself to
make a black hole. That's one way to
make a black hole.
>> So our sun when that run
>> it's not going to become black. It's
pretty wimpy in that department.
It'll still kill us but for different
reasons.
So the mass of the object is so big that
it can't actually explode because the
gravitational pull inwards is so strong.
>> Correct. That's above a certain
threshold. Within there there's the
stars that the explosion is greater than
what the gravity can contain and it
makes a supernova. And those are the
stars that spread heavy elements across
the galaxy enabling us to even exist.
>> So I'm going to read this again. A golf
ball-sized black hole would weigh more
than Earth and swallow it whole, leaving
behind something the size of a lime.
>> Yeah. So, when black holes eat, they get
bigger. So, a lime is bigger than a golf
ball, but not by very much.
We can calculate what the size is.
>> Where would everything go?
>> It's in there. It's compressed down
inside the hole.
>> And if I was And everything near's going
to get pulled in there as well.
>> If it comes too close, right?
>> If it comes too close.
>> Yeah. You can stay, you can keep your
distance. Black holes don't they're not
giant sucking devices. I mean, if you
keep your distance, your if the sun
became a black hole right now, we would
still orbit it. The gravity we feel at
our distance is no different.
>> You say that if the sun suddenly shut
off, we'd freeze at -462
F, which is the background temperature
of the universe.
>> Yes.
>> Once the stored energy ran out.
>> Yeah.
>> Once the stored energy where ran out.
>> Well, in this in the Well, so there's
the sun's energy. the sun
blotted out. But Earth has energy inside
of itself as well. This is what gives us
volcanoes and continental drift and all
the rest of this. So if you don't have a
sun, you want to live near a volcano or
something that is a source of energy for
you. And then you'll live on Earth until
the Earth's energy died out. Ideally by
then you just go to another planet. I
mean why not?
>> How long has our our sun got left?
>> About another 5 billion years.
>> How would we know? It's a good question.
That's a the product of 20th century
modern astrophysics.
Then it was modern. I think of it as
modern where you say, "What kind of star
is this?" You look around the universe
for other stars that are just like it.
And then you see those stars in their
stages of evolution, stars being born,
living out their lives, and dying. And
the star changes its properties from
birth to death. And so you can line up
what where the sun is in that chart and
then plus we know how old earth is. So
we can directly measure the age of the
earth.
>> And so
there's no reason to think that earth
did not form at the same time the sun
did.
>> Another really um fascinating one was
every breath you take contains molecules
once inhaled by every human in history.
>> Yep. That can't be true.
>> Chat GPT it.
>> No. So, here it is. You ready?
>> Yeah.
>> There are more molecules of air
in a single breath of air
than there are breaths of air
in Earth's entire atmosphere.
So if you breathe in and then breathe
out,
there's enough molecules that you
breathe out to populate every breath
that anyone will ever again take on this
earth
and air mixes rather quickly.
Okay?
>> So you it has to mix. It's not
immediately. Give it some time, but you
give it some time. There are molecules
that went in and out of your lungs that
are in China being breathed by people
there uh when enough time is elapsed.
You can calculate that might is years 10
years something like that. There's
tremendous mixing of air. So how's that
for feeling kinship with others? Same
with water. You drink a water there more
molecules of water in a glass of water.
This is a mug of water than there are
mugs of water in all the world's oceans.
So you drink a mug of water and then it
comes out of you in any one of a half
dozen different ways.
There's enough molecules to scatter into
every other mug of water in the world.
So if someone gets a mug of your
molecules and be plenty more plenty of
molecules to go.
>> So if I do a big big inhale, I'm also
I'm inhaling air that contains molecules
that all of my living relatives once
inhaled.
>> Yes. and go further back. Jesus inhaled
him. Muhammad
>> and with every breath.
>> Yes. Every breath. This is the the the
the oneness of it all. That's why it's a
beautiful thing. Astrophysics.
I wouldn't live without it.
>> Do you think it's makes us kinder
learning about the universe or do you
think it makes us more nihilistic and
narcissistic? And
>> no. If you learn about it as you should,
you shouldn't be nihilistic. There's no
force of nihilism in the knowledge,
wisdom, and insight you get by studying
the universe.
You you will never find marching armies
led by astrophysicists to go slaughter
one another.
We the cosmic perspective prevents that.
>> The cosmic perspective.
>> Yeah. By the way, if you look at the
chapter titles in there, they're each
pairs of words that we've all used and
but we've argued over many of them over
our Thanksgiving dinner. I don't know if
there's a version of Thanksgiving in the
UK. Every it's maybe it's just
Christmas. Everybody gathers and the
crazy uncles and aunts come in and you
got to argue with them about, you know,
and you then you you're reminded why you
only see them once a year because No,
there topics in there. Color and race is
in there. Law and Order, Body and Mind,
Meatarians and Vegetarians, Life and
Death.
A lot of reflective moments in there.
So, this book though it's all these
topics that people fight about. Its goal
is to say you think that and you think
that, you got to look at it this way.
>> It's not meat in the middle. No, it's
meat on a plane of existence above what
you're arguing. and you'll look down on
what you're arguing and realize how
ridiculous it is. That's the goal of
that book.
>> Chapter 10 of the book says, "Human
physiology may be overrated."
>> What do you mean by that?
>> Well,
you know, we like to think of ourselves
at the top of
evolutionary
uh properties, but it's really your mind
surely, but not much else.
You know, we
It's odd because we always imagine
aliens having humanoid bodies.
>> Yeah.
>> And there's no reason for that if they
come from another planet. Most life on
Earth doesn't have a humanoid body. The
banana doesn't have a humanoid body and
you have DNA in common with it. You
don't have any DNA in common with an
alien from another planet. Yet, it's
walking around with a neck, eyes, nose,
mouth, head, ears, shoulders, arms,
fingers, kneecaps, feet. Really? Is that
is that is that your best imagination
that you can come up with? Alien from
another planet.
>> Is the Is the universe infinite? I've
often wondered that. Does it just go on
forever or is there a
>> We're not given reason to think it
doesn't. But our horizon has a edge.
>> What we can see?
>> Yeah. But there's no reason to think. So
you're you're a ship at sea.
>> Mhm.
>> And you have a horizon. Are you saying
that's the extent of the ocean? No,
because if you sail towards the horizon,
more horizon shows up and you keep that
up until you hit land.
So in the universe, we have our horizon
and if we went to that horizon, we'd
have a whole other horizon beyond that.
If we traveled to that horizon, be a
whole other horizon there. The question
is how how far does that go? We don't
know.
We have no idea.
It's simpler mathematically to think it
goes forever.
It's curious how there's some equations
where infinities
work just fine in the equation. Uh so we
don't know. We can talk about to our own
horizon. That's it.
>> There's so many people saying that
they've seen aliens. We had someone on
this podcast actually that said they'd
seen aliens. Not they'd seen aliens, but
they had evidence that aliens existed
and they worked in the military and said
that they'd uh you know some of these
spacecraft footage that you see from the
Navy.
>> Did they
show you the alien?
>> No, but you see the videos of the things
bouncing around in the sky.
>> Oh, fuzzy videos.
>> Fuzzy videos.
>> So those are UFOs. They're not aliens.
>> UFOs. Yeah.
>> There's a difference.
>> Oh, yeah.
>> Many people equate the two, but if you
see something in the sky and you don't
know what it is, it's a UFO. And what
does the U stand for?
unidentified.
Until you can identify it, it's a UFO.
And because it does things that you
don't understand,
you cannot equate that with it being an
alien.
You just said you don't know what it is.
Wow, that's amazing. I don't know what
it is. Therefore, it must be a alien.
If once you just said you don't know
what it is, that's the end of the
sentence.
You can't go on and say therefore it
must be anything. You can be impressed
with videos that have no explanation.
I don't have a problem with that. But
you want to turn around and say aliens.
You want to say it's a government cover
up. Do you really think the government
is that competent?
Often the same people who say there's a
masterminded government. They're the
same people who complain that the
government is a bloated bureaucracy,
inefficient bureaucracy that should be
replaced by private enterprise. They're
the same people making those same
statements.
So I I I love the aliens. I want to meet
them, too. My My people, the
astrophysics community has been
searching for aliens for decades.
>> And you've never found evidence of any?
>> Not.
So
the community of amateur astronomers in
the world, okay, amateur astronomy is
that's a badge of honor because you mean
you know the night sky and you own a
telescope, but it's not like amateur
neurosurgeon, okay?
You don't want to go to an amateur
neurosurgeon, but you want to know the
night sky, go to an amateur astronomer.
Amateur astronomers know the night sky.
They know what the sun, moon, and stars
are doing every night. They know.
They're very good at climate and weather
because that affects whether things are
visible. So, they know when weather
systems come in and go out and what
things look like.
You would think if aliens were about up
and about that amateur astronomers would
have seen more of them than anyone else.
But they've seen less
because we know what we're looking at.
It's kind of that simple. The moment you
know what you're looking at, it's an
IFO, isn't it?
>> Yeah.
>> It's not a UFO. And so, yeah, I want to
meet the aliens, but you're gonna show
me fuzzy video, or you're going to say
you have an alien, but it's in a locked
box and you're not going to show it.
If you have an alien in a lock box and
you're not going to show it, that's the
same thing to a scientist as not having
an alien at all.
>> Could you make the case for why aliens
probably do exist and also the case for
why they probably don't exist?
>> No. No, they surely exist in this
universe. The universe is 14 billion
years old and the ingredients of life on
Earth are the most common ingredients in
the universe
and life began on Earth almost as
quickly as it possibly could have.
When Earth finally cooled down after it
being formed, it was about 200 million
years first signs of single cellled
life. So even though we can't duplicate
that yet, we don't know how. That's a
frontier of biology. Earth didn't seem
to have problems getting the job done
within 200 million years. That's Earth.
Now you have exoplanets everywhere
across the galaxy to suggest that life
on Earth is alone in the universe. You'd
have to have some point of philosophy
that requires you believe that because
it's not derived from actual uh evidence
or observations of the universe itself.
So uh aliens usually people mean
intelligent aliens, but we're happy to
find any kind of life at all. bacterial
life that would be that would transform
biology.
>> What about in our galaxy in the Milky
Way galaxy?
>> Yeah, the galaxy is the most sensible
place to So, we've looked we've looked
for exoplanets. So, a planet orbiting
another star cuz you're going to look
for life. We want we presume it's going
to be on a planet. So, if this table is
the galaxy
>> Mhm.
>> and the solar system would be about
right there.
We've searched a circle about this big
for exoplanets. And what's the solar
system versus the
>> It's just the sun and its planets.
>> Oh, okay.
>> Yeah. Solar system.
>> And then that's our solar system there.
And we are part of several hundred
billion stars in the galaxy.
>> Mhm.
>> And this galaxy is one of perhaps as
many as a trillion galaxies in the
observable universe. So to say that
we're alone, that's just you're being
you're being philosophically
irresponsible. So this table is the the
galaxy.
>> Yeah. If it were the galaxy
>> and we've searched a coin
>> coin. Yes, that's a good word to use. A
coin sized volume of this galaxy. We've
searched for exoplanets and by
association life. So folks at the SETI
Institute, the search for
extraterrestrial intelligence. Uh they
come up with an analogy. But there
people have said, "Well, we haven't
found life yet, so maybe there's no life
anywhere." And we say, "No, take a cup
and scoop it into the ocean."
That's like saying, "Hm,
the ocean has no whales in it."
>> Is that the equivalent?
>> Yeah, it's equivalent in terms of the
space of of searching because it's not
only in in physical space, but it's in
time. Suppose aliens sent radio signals
to us and they arrived 2,000 years ago.
Do the Romans have radio telescopes? No.
But we would all count them as
intelligent.
So, communication requires intelligence
and technology.
How long have we had technology to do
that?
80 years.
>> On the chance of probability, do you
think there are aliens in the Milky Way
galaxy?
>> Yeah. Oh, sure.
>> You think there are?
>> I don't see why not. It's a calculation
you can do. I did it with two colleagues
of mine. We have about a hundred
civilizations in the galaxy alive. Now,
that's not many out of the total number
of stars, but again, a civilization has
to evolve out of whatever it was, and
it's a tiny little slice of time
>> relative to how long the planet has been
there.
>> 100 different living civilizations on
the word living because living can mean
many things.
>> Well, I mean, Mars might have had life,
but it would be dead today on the
surface. So, we're looking for living
civilizations.
>> And does that excite you?
>> Yes, completely.
But
you want to now tell me it has visited
you in with fuzzy lights in the sky
and no one has like brought forth an
alien. I I need better evidence because
you're making an extraordinary claim.
>> Humans fascination with meeting these
aliens when we've got crazy species
we've never met on our own planet.
>> That's a good point. And plus, what do
we need real aliens for when we have
Hollywood?
The funny part to me is we have no
knowledge
that aliens want to harm us.
>> But we do have knowledge that humans
want to harm humans. And any encounter
between an advanced civilization and one
that was less advanced in the history of
exploration has never boded well for the
less advanced civilization.
So for me, we are describing aliens
not as we think they would be, but as we
know we are.
>> Mhm.
>> To one another. It's a mirror.
>> And we've only got to play out what we
would do as well if we found an alien
civilization. What would humans do? I
mean, I think we'd go and try and steal
some of them
and bring them here. Yeah. Well, no.
They're probably smarter than us.
That's like that's like worms saying,
"Oh, we found some humans. What should
we do with them? Should we corral them?"
No.
If if aliens came here, they clearly are
more advanced than we are cuz we haven't
left low Earth orbit in 53 years. So, if
they cross the galaxy to visit us,
oh, we're going to take shoot a gun at
them. Don't laugh at us,
you know.
In all the movies though, we beat them.
That's so funny. I've never thought
about that before that. Yeah, we just
shoot guns at them.
>> You shoot guns at them and did it really
make a difference? You know,
>> we put like Brad Pitt or whoever in like
a Tom Cruz and a
>> What's your favorite space movie?
>> Space movie.
>> Well, sci-fi is The Matrix.
>> Why?
>> I love everything about it. The story is
tight. It's one physics error in it, but
without it, they don't have a movie. So
you got to give it I can write him a
hall pass which I feel
that I have the power to do.
>> What was the error? Everyone's going to
be wondering what the error was in the
>> Oh, it's not an error. It's just they
got it's bad physics in it. Okay. So if
you if you remember the AI
computer that's running everything needs
an energy source. And so they're growing
humans in these pods knowing that each
human radiates at about 80 watts. They
didn't give that number, but it's a true
fact. Uh 80 watts, like an 80 watt bulb.
That's how much energy you are consuming
and using. That's a energy rate. Okay.
So they and that's one of the writers
must have known that and said that's
kind of cool. Let's use humans as an
energy source for the machines. All
right. So they're these pods of humans
and they grow the humans from childhood
to adulthood and they put in their head
a world that they're living in which is
just in their head and they think it's
real but it's not. That's the matrix.
Okay. But wait a minute, how do the
humans get their energy?
They feed the humans food.
Well, why are you feeding food to humans
and then using the energy from the
humans for the machine? Bypass the
middleman and just feed the machine.
Something called the second law of
thermody first or second law of
thermodynamics. Anytime energy changes
from one form to another,
it's not 100% efficient. You drive a
car, if you drive a combustion engine
car, you drive it 50 miles, get out, the
engine's hot.
Where' the heat come from? That's wasted
energy converting chemical energy of the
gasoline to kinetic energy of your car.
It is never 100% perfect. So they are
losing energy in with this middleman and
they should just feed themselves
whatever the food they're feeding the
humans. And
if they're smart, they would not have
humans at all. But then there's no
movie. So that's my point. Rode him a
hall pass. You're okay with that. Are
you an easy person to watch movies like
this?
>> Yeah, I'm not I'm not that I'm not the
guy you think I am. I will watch it and
silently Yes, I'll I'll gather a list of
but I'm silent about it. And if you're
interested, I will tell you later.
>> Have you ever heard about this before?
This thing I'm holding in my hands now.
This is called Ketone IQ. Their website
is ketone.com. You've heard me on this
podcast talking about the fact that I
stay much of the year in a ketogenic
state, which is a highly restricted
diet. And the reason I do that is
plentifold. One of them is I spend hours
and hours talking to people for a
living. So I want to make sure my brain
is firing in an optimal way. And the
other reason that I do the ketogenic
diet is because I just feel better. So
when I discovered this, which is what
they call an exogenous ketone product
where you can drink it and it increases
your blood's ketone levels, I was blown
away. I contacted them. I met them. I
invested extremely heavily into their
company and I've become a co-owner of
the company accordingly. and they
sponsor this show now. So, if you want
to try this out for yourself, I
recommend you try it. Just visit
ketone.com/stephven
and you'll get 30% off your first
subscription order. You'll also get a
free gift with your second shipment.
That's ketone.com/stephven.
I did something at 24 years old that has
had a profound impact on my life. I set
myself the challenge of posting every
single day on my social media channels.
And at the time, I was doing it to grow
my following, but it had this profound
impact on my life. And two remarkable
things happened when I did that. I
managed to learn faster because every
single day I'm capturing what is
happening to me and trying to distill it
down into something that I can share
with the world. But more remarkably, it
led me to building a following of many
millions of people. And that's the basis
that I used to launch the Dire of SEO.
And that's why I want to tell you about
our sponsor today, Adobe Express. They
are the platform that I use to make all
the posts across my LinkedIn and across
my Instagram. It's a couple of clicks
and you don't need to be an expert. And
that is why I love using it because I'm
not an expert in graphic design. It's
accessible to use for all of us, even if
we don't have the technical prowess to
design great things. So, if you want to
start compounding both your reach and
your knowledge like I did at 24 years
old, then head to adobe.
Stephven and get started with Adobe
Express. That's adobe.
Stephven.
What's the one outstanding question, if
there is one,
>> that you're desperate to know the answer
to? I don't live life that way.
>> Really?
>> Yeah. It's a sensible question that
you're asking me. I don't want to
diminish the sensibility of it, but I
want to say that that's not how I view
the world. The world is not there's the
one question I need answered. the world
is
what do I need to learn
so that I'm standing in a place I can
yet imagine
asking a question I have yet to think of
in other words as the area of our
knowledge grows
so too does the perimeter of our
ignorance
and so you say what one question no
there'll be a bunch of questions the
area grows some more. I'm standing in a
new place now. There's a question I
didn't even think could be asked before
and that's the question that matters
there and then. But then there's another
question later on as this frontier
continues to advance. So I don't think
about the one question or the two
questions that matter. I think about
questions yet to be dreamt of that we
don't even see because we haven't taken
the frontier to that vista yet.
And so yeah, it's some of that that's
unknowable, but I kind of like that
there's the German poet Rainor Maria
Rilkkey. One of the poems, I don't
remember all the lines, but the one that
matters to me most is learn to love the
questions themselves.
You're trying to find answers and I'm
trying to find the questions.
>> Learn to love the questions themselves.
This kind of brings me back to the top
of the conversation where I was talking
about I've got a lot more questions
these days.
>> That's good. Love it.
>> Sometimes it's difficult
>> and not all questions can be answered
given the state of knowledge. Some
questions are illegitimate questions.
Not all questions are legit questions.
For example, at what temperature does
the number seven melt? What kind of
cheese is the moon made out of?
These are just because the nouns and
verbs are lined up and there's a
question mark doesn't mean the and by
the way when you're in the facing the
unknown you don't know if your question
later on would look that ridiculous.
>> What separates the great scientist from
the average scientist is that they
queued into what questions to ask.
>> Do you think we hurt ourselves by asking
these invalid questions?
>> No. No. You need you don't know if it's
invalid. like the
>> I know the moon is not made out of
cheese today.
I know that because we've been there. We
brought back moon rocks. So today that
question is invalid. But if you never
imagine ever going to the moon and you
don't know anything about physics or
rocks and you look up and it looks like
a hunk of cheese you're eating, it's a
completely legit question. There's a bit
of a there is a bit of a conversation
raging in my friendship circle at the
moment about religion and meaning and
what's the point. Should we be arguing
about these these things about meaning
religion? Is there any is there any
benefit?
>> I think meaning is a very personal thing
to people. So why should you jump in the
middle of their attempt to establish
meaning in their life? We're all very
different people. And so meaning ought
to be different. If meaning was the same
for everyone, you just publish it,
everyone reads it, and we all have
meaning. No, you got to
make it yourself. Some people want to
search for it. Fine. I don't have a
problem with that. I'm not searching for
meaning. I'm creating meaning in my life
because I can control that. Not that
it's important to control everything.
Uh, you know, I I like magic as an adult
because it reminds me I can still be
fooled. Okay. That's so I don't I don't
need to know everything. I just need to
maintain curiosity.
>> And you've got kids, so
>> 29 and 25.
>> Is that the most meaningful thing you've
done in your life? raising kids.
>> Yeah.
>> Uh it's among the more meaningful things
that I would say they did a lot of their
own raising because they're highly
independent and so there's a limit to
how much I should take credit for who
and what they have become. They're a lot
of what they did themselves. But my wife
who's a science scientist, she's a
mathematical physicist. We we made sure
that both our kids were scientifically
literate at an early age. by age 13
certified. So at that point I said I
don't care what grade you get from now
on. I don't care. I know no one will
exploit you for your lack of curiosity
and knowledge about the the objective
universe.
>> And you know we'd be at a a dinner party
and they're like they're in middle
school, right? and someone says, "Oh, I
had a bad day cuz Mercury was in
retrograde." And and and my son would
say, "What actually happened to you
today?" Has that happened on days when
there was they know how to ask
questions? Okay. By the way, if you just
reject what someone says outright,
that's as intellectually lazy as it is
to accept what they say outright. Mhm.
>> What's harder, but I think more fun is
lining up a series of questions to probe
the statement to explore
what is going on in the thoughts and in
the claims of the person with whom
you're conversing.
So if someone says, I have these
crystals, you rub them together, it'll
heal you. My kids would say, what are
the crystals made of? And what tests
have you made for this? and could be
could the healing have been explained in
another way and in what way are the and
they start asking these questions and
then the person will probably just walk
away because they would not have the
answers to all of them and then you know
that's remember I said if an argument
lasts more than 5 minutes then both
sides are wrong the person would there's
nothing there's no place for that to go
to the truly curious person here's
another interesting fact crystals
represent the lowest energy state of the
atomic or molecular configuration that
it's comprised of the lowest energy
state. So people say I have crystal
energy. No, you don't. You have the
lowest energy state of that of that
silicon dioxide that you're calling
quartz. There is no there's no energy
you're going to take out of it. It is in
its lowest energy state. These are
people who have never had chemistry. And
and as an educator, I I don't want to
make fun of this, but when people think
they know something and are audacious
about it, when in fact they don't, that
makes it much harder for an educator to
break through.
>> Horoscopes.
>> Yeah.
>> Well, I've got some stats for you here.
Sure, Neil. Surveys find that roughly
80% of Gen Z believe in astrology to
some degree. Mhm.
>> 72% of those Gen Z and millennials
allowed astrology to influence major
life decisions like romance, health,
work,
>> and education. And many Gen Z's now are
checking their horoscopes weekly.
>> Yeah. I we live in a free country. So I
don't I'm not going to try to stop them.
Uh what would be sad is if that number
got to 100%. And then then you wouldn't
be generating scientists or engineers or
people who the objective truths of the
world matter. And then the civilization
just goes back to the cave where
everything that happened in the natural
world was mysterious
created by forces beyond our knowledge
and understanding. And
uh this is the the title of one of Carl
Sean's books, The Demon Haunted World.
Science as a candle in the dark. That
was the subtitle of that book. So if you
want to think you're not in control of
your fate because the sun, moon, and
planets are. It's like I said, it's a
free country.
>> Is there anything that you've learned
that the universe does to influence us?
>> Yeah. The sun rises and I wake up
because I want to be awake during the
day. Yes.
>> That people aren't.
>> Yeah. The tide comes in and I move my my
my my beach chair back because the tide
came in. Yeah. There are things that
influence my behavior. Yes.
But it's not much more than that.
Uh earth is tipped on its axis. So we
have seasons. I buy coats and wear them
in the winter. That influences my
behavior.
What's your star sign?
>> Well, I once had someone take a class of
mine at the Hayden Planetarium that I
taught on astrophysics. And at the end,
she like the second to last class, she
came to say, "Oh, thank you. Thank you
for the class. I enjoy I'm enjoying the
class, but I want you to know I'm an
astrologer and I'm taking the class so I
can cast horoscopes better." So, I said,
"It's really working for you?" She said,
"Yeah, yeah, yeah." She said, "For
example, what's your horoscope sign?"
And I said,
"Shouldn't you be able to figure that
out?
If all this works and you cast
horoscopes, you ought to tell me what my
sign is." She said, "Okay, okay." And
she said, "Are you Gemini?" I said,
"No."
"Cancer?" That's I said, "No." "Uh, it
must be Leo." I said, "No." Eight
horoscopes later,
she gets the correct answer and says, "I
knew it.
So, I'm simply saying that
her ninth guess out of 12 was correct
and she declares, "I knew it."
>> Why do people want to believe in things
like this?
>> I I think they want the world to still
have mysteries because mysteries are
beautiful things. However,
the world still has mysteries. They're
just different mysteries from whatever
there used to be. And so follow the
mysteries where they take you. And
there's another branch of all of us who
must have answers to every question
because they're not learning to love the
questions. They only want to love the
answer. So they say, "What was around
before the big bang?" I said, "I don't
know. We got top people. Something had
to be around." I said, "I don't know.
Must have been God." So there's their
answer that then they're happy.
What happens after death? Well, it looks
like you rot in the ground, but
otherwise, and that's what physics, it's
got to be something your soul. I said,
there's got to be the go heaven. Okay,
that's their answer. They've got their
answer. And if that's your answer, at
every turn, you you make a you're not as
good an investigator of the unknown
because you just invented the answer to
the unknown. You're content. What is
dark matter? Dark? I don't know. We got
top people working. Is that the the
spirit of God?
Okay.
then that person won't walk into a lab
to continue to study what dark matter
and dark energy is. I don't mind if you
want to say it's God, but don't let that
stop your curiosity. But if you say it's
God and then you're done, then you're
not very useful in the lab.
>> Those people seem to be happier and
healthier, though, which is the
surprising thing. Religious people.
Well, again, so it it could be because
they believe there's a God that tells
them who to sleep with and where to eat
and how to pray, or because they have a
regular dose of community.
I don't know that those are completely
separable variables. There are people
who they love and care about that they
see every week, which is not happening
with so many people today.
>> Do you think you would be happier if you
believed in God?
>> I'm a pretty happy guy.
>> Do you think you'd be happier?
>> I don't know. I see people I've seen
very happy people in uh celebrating
their version of God. But then there are
other people who really happy in their
version of God. And here's the problem.
Deeply religious people
typically find other religions
deeply religious people will declare for
themselves and others in that religion
that all the other religions are false.
>> False. And if not false, just make
preposterous claims. It is so obvious to
them how false all the other religions
are. Now you go to this religion. It is
obvious how preposterous the rest of the
religions are. You go around religion to
religion.
And
so what's really going on here is devout
people in so many of these religions are
atheists
to every religion but their own.
every religion but their own. Okay. How
can a mountain have moved to Muhammad?
That can't be. Okay. Oh, but yes, the
creator of the universe impregnated a
woman in the Middle East 2,000 years
ago. That's more believable than
anything in the Quran for this person.
Okay. And then the Jews are saying,
"You're Jesus is the son of God. What?
You are you crazy? Where'd you get that
from? He's a good Jew, nice prophet, but
son of God, you're going too far." So
everybody's saying what's not true. So
they're atheist for every other they
just don't believe any other religion.
Whereas an actual atheist just has one
more religion to that category.
It's your religion.
The atheist agrees with you that all the
other religions are preposterous in
their claims.
But they also believe they also think
your religion is preposterous. And
people don't accept that. they don't it
doesn't land well. So I don't have any
problems with people being religious. I
don't have any issues with that. It's um
I don't try to impose my I other people
try to do it. I've seen them do this. I
have a quote where I'm misqued just
because they want me on their side.
Okay, you ready? It's a simple quote.
If every time I tell you science doesn't
understand it and you say well God must
be that God made the universe because we
don't God made life because we don't
know how to make life yet. God. If
that's if that is your definition and
understanding of God,
then as science progresses, it will
solve these questions,
pushing the God back outward
to places that have yet to be
discovered. And so the quote is, "If to
you God is where science has yet to
tread,
then God is an ever receding pocket of
scientific ignorance."
That's that that references what
philosophers have called God of the
Gaps. It goes way back thousands of
years. We don't understand it. There's a
God. The storm is Poseidon. Okay?
Lightning bolt struck. It's Zeus. All
right? That's God of the Gaps. God of
the gaps is a timehonored exercise in
human civilization. And all I'm saying
is that statement
is objectively true because it's an if
statement.
If to you God is where science has yet
to tread, then as science continues to
tread, you're a pocket, a shrinking
pocket of scientific. That's your God.
Okay? It's not an opinion. There's a
statement of an if statement. The
consequences of an if statement. I've
had people take the second half and put
it on a t-shirt.
God is an ever receding pocket of
scientific uh ignorance. Neil deGrasse
Tyson is not what I said.
That's half of what I said. And that's
only true if to you God is where science
has yet to tread. But to pull that out
and make that the truth, no. I would
never make such a statement ever. You're
66, right?
>> Hang on.
>> I will be 67 in a month. In a month.
>> Okay. So, you're
>> a month from this recording.
>> So, I'm 33.
>> Okay. Half my age.
>> Exactly half. I I was wondering, you're
a very wise man. What is the advice that
you wish someone had said to you at 33
that you could give to me now?
>> I have no such advice, and I'll tell you
why.
If you're alert and you're smart, alert
meaning you notice things and you're
you're smart and you you learn
living life itself
is the lesson.
So if so a version of what you just
asked is what given what you know today
what would you tell yourself if you met
yourself when you were 15 20 25 30
whatever and I said I wouldn't tell him
anything
because if I gave a bit of wisdom
to I say you're about to do that but
don't do that. Okay.
There's no better lesson than doing
something and learning that you
shouldn't do it. That's the best lesson.
We don't live life because there's a
list of things that other people said
don't do. You're going to explore your
life. That's what you're going to do.
And some things are great and some
things you don't want to do again. Some
things you're bad.
That's where the wisdom comes from.
You earn it.
It's the most It's the most It's the
strongest kind of wisdom you can have,
provided you learn from a mistake. If
you're just an idiot and you just keep
making the mistake, my advice for you is
don't make the same mistake twice. But
that's you don't need me for that.
So, you'll make a decision about this
podcast or some business decision. And
no, it didn't turn out right. Here's a
better example of this. You ready?
>> This is a very American kind of story
I'm about to tell. immigrant comes over
back when that was a thing you could do.
Comes to the United States and they work
hard, very hardworking.
They first sweep the the street in front
of a store up front and then they're in
the store and they learn the trade and
then the owner dies and they take over
the trade and they're working hard and
they're scrapping and they and then they
buys the adjacent store and they build
the thing and becomes and then he moves
and he lives in a big house and he has
kids. Okay.
And he says to himself,
"When I was your age, I had to like
scrge for food and I had to like sweep
things and I want to make sure my kids
don't have to do that.
I want to make sure they don't have to
do that." Okay? So, you provide
things for them so they don't have to do
this. And now they grow up and they're
adults
and they're dead beats.
They have no motivation. They have no
ambition. They have no vision statement
because everything got handed to them.
And what what does the adult say to the
kids? Where did I go wrong? I gave you
everything I didn't have.
That's where they went wrong. Because
they gave the kids everything he didn't
have. And what made that person was what
they struggled, the the decisions they
had to make, the decisions they got
right, the decisions they got wrong, who
they met, how they treated people. This
is life experience.
And it doesn't come on a bumper sticker.
Doesn't come on a what's the secret?
Just like going to someone's home and
one of the one of the hosts is a is
actually a trained chef, right? and
maybe worked in a restaurant and they
prepare this exquisite meal and you said
this is delicious.
What's your secret?
Oh, the secret? I went to chef school
for six years. That's the secret. You're
thinking this is one sentence I could
tell you and then you that'll make
everything better. No. No.
Just stay alert. Learn new stuff every
day and learn from your mistakes because
those lessons are greater
than someone just telling you to not do
it.
Then you have no such life experience to
build into the wisdom that you want to
acquire in the years to come.
>> My last question for you is and I I hear
it the
>> I didn't think you'd ever have a last
question.
>> No. Yeah. I mean for now I should say my
last question for now but um my last
question for now and I kind of hear it
in between some of the things you say is
and I've just moved here so I've just
moved to Los Angeles. How do you feel
about America right now?
Well, you know, it's a free country and
we vote in our leaders and right now
there's a whole set of people in charge
that are doing different things from
what had happened in previous
uh years, previous leaderships, even
previous leaders of that same political
party. The what's going on is very
different from anything that I think
people would have predicted. A lot of
people like
complaining about leadership, but we
live in a country where we choose our
leaders. So, we're going to complain
about the leadership. You should be
complaining about the people about the
electorate. I'm an educator. I I've
never I I've never
complained about politicians.
They represent people. I was once in the
Rayburn office building, Washington DC,
in the science committee's room,
beautifully decorated with science um
art and sculptures and things. One of
the members of the science committee
back then was a young earth creationist.
Young earth creationists. Universe
created in six days, earth created in
6,000 years. At most, 10,000 years. And
I knew he was going to be there. And I
thought to myself, do I grab him by the
lapels and say, "What are you thinking
on his science comm?" And then I
thought, "No, no.
If he thinks that, presumably, so does
his electorate.
>> They voted him in.
And this electorate of fellow citizens,
as am I in this country, so I can't
indict him. Let me go have a
conversation with the folks who voted
for him." I said, "Why do you think
this?" and you would consider this and
that's my duty as an educator not to hit
anybody on the head who's in Washington.
So, do we blame the educators and the
media people like you know people like
me that
>> No, I that's the blame game is I don't
feel that way.
My parents when we they showed us the
images
of the dogs and the water hoses on the
protesters and in the south American
South
they were never bitter. They said these
people don't know any better. They don't
know any differently. you have to talk
to them and
you know teach them. That's very
different from saying holding up your
fist saying I'm going to fight them
because they're my enemy.
It's I want to teach them because
they're my fellow citizens.
And that's how I feel. So my worry is
that there are decisions made that are
not in the best interest of the people
who voted for those decisions. the
longer term implications are um could be
devastating if you cut basic science.
Basic science feeds engineering.
Engineering feeds economies. And so if
you don't think basic science matters
because you don't either understand the
title of the research or the scientists
didn't communicate it interestingly
enough, whatever, and you say this is a
waste of money, take it all out. Let's
just do the engineering. You'll be
oified in place.
>> And is that what's happened? We are on
the brink of that happening right now.
That's correct.
>> The average person has no idea about
this.
>> I've tried to, you know, illuminate the
public about it. It's easy to say that
basic science doesn't matter or can't
matter or will never matter because we
don't know yet.
Right now is the centennial decade. So
let's go back to the 1920s where quantum
physics was developed.
If you were around back then, what would
you have said? Why are you studying
atoms? who can't even see atoms. Don't
waste your time. You're a brilliant
person. Go work on this other problem
that we have in society.
And it would take decades.
But the information
technology revolution
has as its core
the creation, storage, and retrieval of
digital information. that can only
happen with the exploitation of the
quantum.
So this decade of science physics that
was discovered by the 1950s it was like
whoa this is some important physics
here. No one would have known that at
the time.
Why?
Let me keep going. Was it 1876 uh
Philadelphia Expo?
Alexander Graham Bell showcases his new
contraption, the telephone.
And people say, "Wow, this is kind of
cool. You should read what people wrote
about it. This is a great invention. I
can imagine there might be one in every
city in the future.
in this book
>> uh the uh that one. Yeah.
>> There's a whole chapter called science
and technology
where I chronicle
I chronicle
how people think about the technology of
their day and how they always get it
wrong when they predict the future
because foundational science comes in at
the bottom and you don't see that coming
and it gurgles its way up. Clever
engineers apply it and then
You have an iPad.
>> Neil, thank you so much.
>> Well, thanks for for having me back.
This is our second time together. It
>> You bought out the bookstore here. What
did you do?
>> Yes. We wanted to to come prepared. I
mean, you have you write the most
incredible books. Um, and you talk in
the most incredible ways. I said this to
you last time, but you're one of the
most incredible storytellers I've ever
heard. you make something which is I
really didn't have a huge amount of
interest in in school suddenly
interesting to us as adults which is a
remarkable thing.
>> So thank you for doing what you do. We
do have a closing tradition where the
last guest leaves a question for the
next guest.
>> Oh, is that right?
>> Yes. Okay.
>> And they don't know who they're leaving
it for. The question left for you is how
good are you at knowing
what you will regret and is there
anything you do regret? Yeah, I think
regrets are things that you only realize
when it's too late. Otherwise, you would
have preempted it and not have to regret
it. So,
uh I don't know that I'm any better than
anyone else at it. Cuz if you're good at
it, you'll never be in a position to
have to do something that you would
regret. The fact is you went past
something that you did and say, "Damn, I
shouldn't have I got to regret that." So
I to be good at knowing in advance that
you're going to regret something. That's
almost an impossible scenario. If I'm
good at seeing it, then I would never
have to regret anything because I would
have preempted it. So for all of us, the
fact that we have regrets is we move
past something that we did. It was like,
damn, I I regret that after the fact.
>> Do you have any regrets?
Uh I was a a
uh in college
I majoring in physics and I think I was
a junior. There were students that came
in from other schools for a summer
program.
>> Mhm.
>> Okay. High school seniors. I think they
were uh they might have been freshmen in
their college but I think they were high
school students. And I was a men not a
mentor but I would guide them in these
research projects. Then at the end we
had to write an evaluation of them.
And there's one student I wrote an
evaluation that
was accurate
but
unnecessary.
I said he pretends he knows things that
he doesn't and he's, you know, he's
faking this and he's and I didn't yet
know
how to speak encouragingly about someone
separate from just speaking factually
about someone.
So, is that an art? Is it a science to
do that? I don't know, but I know I
didn't have it at the time. I just
simply described what I saw and I said
he, you know, he this is not going to
work. He this this it was very deflating
>> to him.
>> Mhm. And
uh considering that at the time I'm
majoring in physics at Harvard, he's
coming from some
high school somewhere and I'm a Harvard
student telling him that, you know, he
ain't and I should not have done
that.
>> Did he contact you later?
>> No. He might have taken up another
field. I don't know. But so I I regret
that. But it would take me four years to
even realize that that was a regrettable
thing because I didn't know how to, you
know, as an educator, you want to
encourage people. You see where the
weaknesses are and figure out ways to
have that person eradicate them, improve
upon them, rather than just say, "This
is not working. Go home."
>> Why? Why?
>> I regret that. And that's probably the
thing I regret most in life.
>> Really?
>> Yeah. because it was who knows what
consequences that has on that person's
life.
>> And you remembered that.
>> Oh yes. Oh my gosh. Yes.
>> What how how do you remember that? Cuz
you wrote you write it down in his
report card or whatever on this
assessment.
>> Time goes on. Does something happen for
you to think back to what you wrote?
>> Uh well, I've written many letters of
reference for people, more than I can
count. Mhm.
>> So I think every time I write a letter
of reference, I think about how I could
have written that letter back then.
That's a regret
and I live with that.
>> I can see you live with it.
>> Yeah. So I think I made up for it
>> just in how many people and there are
other people who needed help and so you
find out how they can improve it and
advise on that so that everybody lifts
up. That's how you make a better world.
And it goes back to what you said at the
start. You wanted on your tombstone,
which is certainly something you've
already done in droves more so than I
think anybody.
>> So you tell me I can die now. Is that is
that what you just you just said that?
>> Or you can go on holiday or
>> it's up to you. Um but thank you so much
for being who you are. You're a huge
inspiration to me. I know Jack is a mega
mega fan of yours as well and has um
loves your work and you're the both the
reason that I
>> well I I I let go of my religious belief
at 18 years old
>> and I don't blame me for that. I don't
want you to lose your religion because
of me. No, but I just said I let go of
my religious belief at 18 years old and
I became atheist agnostic. Then I became
really agnostic. But then I kind of fell
in love with the universe and I fell in
love in the universe because of you and
because of Cosmos, which is one of my
favorite things ever to watch. and I
found all the curiosity and awe and
magic that I needed to find by by
reading your work and watching the the
wonderful movies that you've made. So,
thank you so much for that.
>> Well, the universe is a rich repository
of
spiritual fulfillment.
>> Yeah.
>> If I may.
>> Yes. To say the least. Yeah. Wow. And
your book is exactly that. I highly
recommend everybody goes and checks it
out. It's out on I think it's the 21st
of October.
>> Oh, yeah. Yeah. The the the next
installment in Merlin. Yeah. In October.
Yeah. I'll link it on the screen. I'll
link it below. Highly recommend.
>> It's called just visiting this planet.
So, so I'd lied before. I can give you
some advice.
>> Please. Ready?
>> Yeah.
>> This is 67y old advice.
>> At no time
should you
overvalue
your own thoughts.
You should you should
you should allow yourself to be humbled
daily with new ideas that challenge any
or everything that you currently think.
That's wisdom. I think
>> how do I know who I am if if I don't
hang on to
>> maybe you're not maybe you only are who
you are on your deathbed because then
you would have completed your life.
You're still in your work in progress.
You're 33. So last year when you were 31
you would have lived your billionth
second.
>> Okay. And if you if you lead a a healthy
life you should get three billion
seconds out of it. You get to 93 at
least that. So time passes. If you learn
something new every day, that forces
extra context for extra perspective, new
perspective on whatever you knew
yesterday. You have to stay open to
that. And I read old science books
because I watch people's confidence that
they had in what they thought they knew.
It can be embarrassing in some cases.
And it's very humbling
>> to look back at people writing about
their own world.
There's a book from 1899 the guy said on
the sun and it says we've learned so
much about the sun in the last three
years I had to up the edition of the
book I wrote three years ago and I'm
saying you don't know about the sun
okay uh in 19 in 1899 but he's feeling
it he's feeling that joy and so I it
it keeps me humble on the frontier
on this perimeter of ignorance
>> because there's way more to discover
than anything you've already learned.
>> Maybe that's the antidote in medicine
that society needs right now, too.
>> I think so, cuz everybody is running
things thinking they know better than
everybody else.
[Music]
Happy birthday.